3.  Establishing and Managing DNS-over-TLS Sessions

3.1.  Session Initiation

   By default, a DNS server that supports DNS over TLS MUST listen for
   and accept TCP connections on port 853, unless it has mutual
   agreement with its clients to use a port other than 853 for DNS over
   TLS.  In order to use a port other than 853, both clients and servers
   would need a configuration option in their software.

   By default, a DNS client desiring privacy from DNS over TLS from a
   particular server MUST establish a TCP connection to port 853 on the
   server, unless it has mutual agreement with its server to use a port
   other than port 853 for DNS over TLS.  Such another port MUST NOT be
   port 53 but MAY be from the "first-come, first-served" port range.
   This recommendation against use of port 53 for DNS over TLS is to
   avoid complication in selecting use or non-use of TLS and to reduce
   risk of downgrade attacks.  The first data exchange on this TCP
   connection MUST be the client and server initiating a TLS handshake
   using the procedure described in [RFC5246].

   DNS clients and servers MUST NOT use port 853 to transport cleartext
   DNS messages.  DNS clients MUST NOT send and DNS servers MUST NOT
   respond to cleartext DNS messages on any port used for DNS over TLS
   (including, for example, after a failed TLS handshake).  There are
   significant security issues in mixing protected and unprotected data,




Hu, et al.                   Standards Track                    [Page 4]

RFC 7858                      DNS over TLS                      May 2016


   and for this reason, TCP connections on a port designated by a given
   server for DNS over TLS are reserved purely for encrypted
   communications.

   DNS clients SHOULD remember server IP addresses that don't support
   DNS over TLS, including timeouts, connection refusals, and TLS
   handshake failures, and not request DNS over TLS from them for a
   reasonable period (such as one hour per server).  DNS clients
   following an out-of-band key-pinned privacy profile (Section 4.2) MAY
   be more aggressive about retrying DNS-over-TLS connection failures.

3.2.  TLS Handshake and Authentication

   Once the DNS client succeeds in connecting via TCP on the well-known
   port for DNS over TLS, it proceeds with the TLS handshake [RFC5246],
   following the best practices specified in [BCP195].

   The client will then authenticate the server, if required.  This
   document does not propose new ideas for authentication.  Depending on
   the privacy profile in use (Section 4), the DNS client may choose not
   to require authentication of the server, or it may make use of a
   trusted Subject Public Key Info (SPKI) Fingerprint pin set.

   After TLS negotiation completes, the connection will be encrypted and
   is now protected from eavesdropping.

3.3.  Transmitting and Receiving Messages

   All messages (requests and responses) in the established TLS session
   MUST use the two-octet length field described in Section 4.2.2 of
   [RFC1035].  For reasons of efficiency, DNS clients and servers SHOULD
   pass the two-octet length field, and the message described by that
   length field, to the TCP layer at the same time (e.g., in a single
   "write" system call) to make it more likely that all the data will be
   transmitted in a single TCP segment ([RFC7766], Section 8).

   In order to minimize latency, clients SHOULD pipeline multiple
   queries over a TLS session.  When a DNS client sends multiple queries
   to a server, it should not wait for an outstanding reply before
   sending the next query ([RFC7766], Section 6.2.1.1).

   Since pipelined responses can arrive out of order, clients MUST match
   responses to outstanding queries on the same TLS connection using the
   Message ID.  If the response contains a Question Section, the client
   MUST match the QNAME, QCLASS, and QTYPE fields.  Failure by clients
   to properly match responses to outstanding queries can have serious
   consequences for interoperability ([RFC7766], Section 7).




Hu, et al.                   Standards Track                    [Page 5]

RFC 7858                      DNS over TLS                      May 2016


3.4.  Connection Reuse, Close, and Reestablishment

   For DNS clients that use library functions such as "getaddrinfo()"
   and "gethostbyname()", current implementations are known to open and
   close TCP connections for each DNS query.  To avoid excess TCP
   connections, each with a single query, clients SHOULD reuse a single
   TCP connection to the recursive resolver.  Alternatively, they may
   prefer to use UDP to a DNS-over-TLS-enabled caching resolver on the
   same machine that then uses a system-wide TCP connection to the
   recursive resolver.

   In order to amortize TCP and TLS connection setup costs, clients and
   servers SHOULD NOT immediately close a connection after each
   response.  Instead, clients and servers SHOULD reuse existing
   connections for subsequent queries as long as they have sufficient
   resources.  In some cases, this means that clients and servers may
   need to keep idle connections open for some amount of time.

   Proper management of established and idle connections is important to
   the healthy operation of a DNS server.  An implementor of DNS over
   TLS SHOULD follow best practices for DNS over TCP, as described in
   [RFC7766].  Failure to do so may lead to resource exhaustion and
   denial of service.

   Whereas client and server implementations from the era of [RFC1035]
   are known to have poor TCP connection management, this document
   stipulates that successful negotiation of TLS indicates the
   willingness of both parties to keep idle DNS connections open,
   independent of timeouts or other recommendations for DNS over TCP
   without TLS.  In other words, software implementing this protocol is
   assumed to support idle, persistent connections and be prepared to
   manage multiple, potentially long-lived TCP connections.

   This document does not make specific recommendations for timeout
   values on idle connections.  Clients and servers should reuse and/or
   close connections depending on the level of available resources.
   Timeouts may be longer during periods of low activity and shorter
   during periods of high activity.  Current work in this area may also
   assist DNS-over-TLS clients and servers in selecting useful timeout
   values [RFC7828] [TDNS].

   Clients and servers that keep idle connections open MUST be robust to
   termination of idle connection by either party.  As with current DNS
   over TCP, DNS servers MAY close the connection at any time (perhaps
   due to resource constraints).  As with current DNS over TCP, clients
   MUST handle abrupt closes and be prepared to reestablish connections
   and/or retry queries.




Hu, et al.                   Standards Track                    [Page 6]

RFC 7858                      DNS over TLS                      May 2016


   When reestablishing a DNS-over-TCP connection that was terminated, as
   discussed in [RFC7766], TCP Fast Open [RFC7413] is of benefit.
   Underlining the requirement for sending only encrypted DNS data on a
   DNS-over-TLS port (Section 3.2), when using TCP Fast Open, the client
   and server MUST immediately initiate or resume a TLS handshake
   (cleartext DNS MUST NOT be exchanged).  DNS servers SHOULD enable
   fast TLS session resumption [RFC5077], and this SHOULD be used when
   reestablishing connections.

   When closing a connection, DNS servers SHOULD use the TLS close-
   notify request to shift TCP TIME-WAIT state to the clients.
   Additional requirements and guidance for optimizing DNS over TCP are
   provided by [RFC7766].